---
layout: post
title:  "Sudoku"
date:   2017-04-05 12:00:00 -0600
categories: Game
tags: Javascript
---
This pen has been the hardest coding project for me yet! I got the idea of
writing a sudoku game that can generate a board and check the user's solution
after trying a hard sudoku problem while having lunch with my math professor, Dr. Yasskin.
<!--end excerpt-->

## The HTML
This project is the first time I used an HTML preprocessor ([Haml](http://haml.info))
to simplify writing the HTML. Using Haml reduces the amount of markup by using loops
and nesting selectors.

I began by writing Haml to display the board, which is organized into 3 horizontal
rows which each contain 3 squares, which each contain 9 cells. This requires a few
nested `do` loops which is written like below:

{% highlight haml %}
.sudoku
  -3.times do
    .s-row
      -3.times do
        .square
          -9.times do
            .cell
              %span.label 1
              %span.value
{% endhighlight %}

There is also a bar of numbers below the board which can be used to insert numbers
into the board:

{% highlight haml %}
.row
  .col
    .numbers-bar
      - (1..9).each do |i|
        .number= i
{% endhighlight %}

## The CSS
I used Sass as a preprocessor and first declared several variables:
{% highlight scss %}
$cell-size: 50px;
$hover-color: #BBDDFF;
$selected-color: #76A8FF;
$error-color: #E58080;
$valid-color: #95E595;
$bar-color: complement($hover-color);
{% endhighlight %}

The markup for styling the board is as follows:
{% highlight scss %}
.sudoku {
  width: 475px;
  margin: auto;
  .square {
    float: left;
    border: 1px solid #000;
    .cell {
      float: left;        
      position: relative;
      height: $cell-size;
      width: $cell-size;
      background: #fff;        
      border: 1px solid #000;
      box-sizing: content-box;
      &:hover {
        background-color: $hover-color;
        .label {color: #333;}
      }
      &.selected {
        background-color: $selected-color;
        .label {color: #333;}
      }
      &.error {
        background-color: $error-color;
      }
      &.valid {
        background-color: $valid-color;
      }
      .label {
        position: absolute;
        color: #aaa;
        top: 1px;
        left: 2px;
        font-size: 12px;
      }
      .value {
        display: block;
        font-size: 30px;            
        color: #000;
        width: 100%;
        height: 100%;
        text-align: center;
      }
    }
    .cell:nth-child(3n+1) {
      clear: both;
    }
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}

## The Javascript
After the UI was built to my satisfaction, I started thinking about the board
generation code. I decided to represent the board as a 2D array (although
later I realized I could have simply used an 81-item 1D array). Any value from the
board can be retrieved by its row index and column index: `array[row-index][column-index]`.

### Generating the Puzzle Board
I generated the starting board in two ways. For easy games, I took a solved board
and removed either 4 or 5 numbers within each square. For more difficult games, I
found a valid existing board that was not solved and permuted the numbers, the
row groups, column groups, and the rows and columns within each group of three.
This jumbles the board but ensures it remains valid.

#### Permuting Numbers
Permuting all the numbers is conceptually simple: one way to implement a permutation
is to increment each number on the board so that all 1's become 2's, all 2's become
3's, and so on until you reach 9's which become 1's. However, I wanted a slightly
more complex method: randomly selecting a number instead of incrementing. The key
to this method is making sure each number is only mapped to a single output number
and ensuring that the same number is not used twice for different inputs. If that
doesn't make sense to you, take a look at the function I wrote:
{% highlight js %}
permuteNumbers: function(board) {
    var permutedBoard = util.clone(board);
    var left = [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9];
    var linked = [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9];
    // generate permutation
    for (var i=0;i<9;i++) {
      var index=0; var replacement=0;
      while (index==replacement) { // they can't be the same
        index = util.getRand(0,left.length-1);
        replacement = left[index]; // randomly select a replacement number
      }
      left.splice(index,1); // prevent number from being used again
      linked[i] = replacement; // replace 1-9 with its replacement
    }
    // implement: switch board numbers
    for (var j=0;j<9;j++) {
      for (var k=0;k<9;k++) {
        if (board[j][k]) { // if board cell not 0
          permutedBoard[j][k] = linked[board[j][k]-1]; // replace numbers with their links
        }
      }
    }
    return permutedBoard;
  }
{% endhighlight %}
*Note: this function is encapsulated within the `puzzle` object, so this function
is actually a method on that object, hence the `method: function()` syntax.*

#### Permuting Rows and Columns
The permutation algorithm I wrote for swapping rows and columns in the same group
works by iterating through rows/columns, randomly selecting two to swap, and continuing
until all row and column groups have had a swap:
{% highlight js %}
permuteRowCol: function(board) {
    var pBoard = util.clone(board);
    for (var i=0;i<3;i++) { // manipulate rows and cols in same group
      var row1 = util.getRand(0,2) + 3*i; // 1st row to manipulate
      var row2 = util.getRand(0,2) + 3*i; // 2nd row to manipulate
      while (row2==row1) {
        row2 = util.getRand(0,2) + 3*i; // make sure row2 !== row1
      }
      var temp = pBoard[row1]; // store first row
      pBoard[row1] = pBoard[row2]; // swap rows
      pBoard[row2] = temp; // swap rows
      var col1 = util.getRand(0,2)+3*i; var col2 = util.getRand(0,2)+3*i;
      while (col2==col1) {
        col2 = util.getRand(0,2)+3*i; // column 2 cannot be same as column 1
      }
      for (var j=0;j<pBoard.length;j++) { // loop through rows
        var temp = pBoard[j][col1]; // store col 1 current cell value
        pBoard[j][col1] = pBoard[j][col2]; // swap col1 cell w/ col2 cell
        pBoard[j][col2] = temp; // swap col2 cell w/ col1 cell
      }
    }
    return pBoard;
  }
{% endhighlight %}

#### Permuting Row and Column Groups
While similar in concept, permuting row and column **groups of 3** is different
than the algorithm above. For the row groups, two are swapped at random using a
temporary variable (no iteration necessary). For the column groups, the rows are
iterated over and a temporary variable inside the loop is used to swap all cells
withing the columns. The complete function is shown below:
{% highlight js %}
permuteRowColGroups: function(board) {
    var pBoard = util.clone(board);
    var rowGrp1 = util.getRand(0,2) * 3+1; // 1st row to manipulate
    var rowGrp2 = util.getRand(0,2) * 3+1; // 2nd row to manipulate
    while (rowGrp2==rowGrp1) {
      rowGrp2 = util.getRand(0,2) * 3+1; // make sure rowGrp2 !== rowGrp1
    }
    var temp1 = [pBoard[rowGrp1-1], pBoard[rowGrp1], pBoard[rowGrp1+1]]; // store row group 1
    pBoard[rowGrp1-1] = pBoard[rowGrp2-1];
    pBoard[rowGrp1] = pBoard[rowGrp2];
    pBoard[rowGrp1+1] = pBoard[rowGrp2+1];
    pBoard[rowGrp2-1] = temp1[0];
    pBoard[rowGrp2] = temp1[1];
    pBoard[rowGrp2+1] = temp1[2];
    var colGrp1 = util.getRand(0,2) * 3+1; var colGrp2 = util.getRand(0,2) * 3+1;
    while (colGrp2==colGrp1) {
      colGrp2 = util.getRand(0,2) * 3+1; // column 2 cannot be same as column 1
    }
    for (var j=0;j<9;j++) { // loop through rows
      var temp2 = {
        first: pBoard[j][colGrp1-1],
        second: pBoard[j][colGrp1],
        third: pBoard[j][colGrp1+1]
      }; // store col group 1 current cell values
      pBoard[j][colGrp1-1] = pBoard[j][colGrp2-1];
      pBoard[j][colGrp1] = pBoard[j][colGrp2];
      pBoard[j][colGrp1+1] = pBoard[j][colGrp2+1];
      pBoard[j][colGrp2-1] = temp2.first;
      pBoard[j][colGrp2] = temp2.second;
      pBoard[j][colGrp2+1] = temp2.third;
    }
    return pBoard;
  }
{% endhighlight %}

### The Solver Algorithms
Now came the *really hard part*: writing the board solver function. I actually ended
up writing two different solver functions, one as a brute force algorithm
and one as a "smarter" algorithm. One important concept that I learned to keep
in mind while writing these functions is to distinguish between `mutable` cells
and `immutable` cells. Mutable cells are open or blank cells which are initially set
to 0 and *can* be changed by the function. Immutable cells are hints already given
on the puzzle board - they **cannot** be changed by the function because they are a
*known part of the solution*.

#### Brute Force Solver
The brute force method starts by assuming a 1 in the first mutable cell and checks for
validity in ascending numerical order before moving onto the next mutable cell.
If no number is valid for the cell, it retreats to the previous cell and
increments the cell value. As you can imagine, this takes a long time for
certain board configurations, but at least it guarantees to find a solution
if one exists.

While conceptually simple, implementing the algorithm proved more difficult. I first
realized I would need a Boolean variable which indicates whether the the function
is proceeding forward or backwards at the moment - I named this variable `goingBack`.
*Note that it is within the `vars` object where I stored many other variables.*

Next, I needed a way to determine where the first mutable cell is located, which I
did with a simple nested `for` loop and two variables storing the row and column
indices.

To start the solver, a `for` loop is initiated to iterate over all cells. Variables
`i` and `j` are declared as row and column indices, respectively. Next, an `if`
statement determines whether we have a mutable or immutable cell. Immutable cells
are simple skipped while mutable cells are dealt with. Otherwise, if the cell is
immutable and we're going backwards (checking `vars.goingBack`), we keep going
back by decreasing the counter by 2.

Inside the `if` statement, we determine the current square number (0-8), cell number
(also 0-8), and declare the initial value we're using (1). If we're backtracking,
we increment the current cell's value and check if it is now above 9, in which case
we reset the value to 0 and keep going back. If we're at the beginning and we reach
the value 9 with an invalid board, the function throws an error and a message is
displayed (although this shouldn't happen with valid boards).

Next, if we're **not** backtracking, we start with the value 1 and check whether the
board is valid in its current configuration (we'll get to this checking function later).
If the board is not valid, we increment! If the value goes over 9, we start backtracking
(change `vars.goingBack` to `false`) and start over. Otherwise, we keep whatever value
is valid and go on to the next cell.
{% highlight js %}
bruteSolve: function(board) {
    vars.goingBack = false;
    var solved = util.clone(board); // start with the board hints
    var freeRow; var freeCol;
    // get first mutable cell
    for (var a=0;a<9;a++) {
      for (var b=0;b<9;b++) {
        if (!board[a][b]) {
          freeRow = a; freeCol = b; a = 9; b = 9;
        }
      }
    }
    // start search algorithm
    for (var a=0;a<81;a++) {
      var i = Math.floor(a/9);
      var j = a % 9;
      // all cells we need to change (ones that have 0s)
      if (!board[i][j]) {
        var sqnum = Math.floor(i/3) * 3+Math.floor(j/3);
        var cell = 3*(i%3)+(j%3);
        var value = 1; // initial value tried for each cell
        // if backtracking, increment current cell and check if >9
        if (vars.goingBack) {
          value = solved[i][j] + 1;
          if (value > 9) {
            // check if this is the first cell
            if (i==freeRow && j==freeCol) {
              console.log('Cannot be solved!');
              return false;
            }
            // set cell to 0 and keep going back
            solved[i][j] = 0;
            a = a - 2;
          }
        }
        // try values 1-9
        while (value < 10) {
          // if not valid, increment value
          if (!puzzle.checkValid(value,solved,i,j,sqnum,cell)) {
            value++;
            // if value > 9, go back!
            if (value > 9) {
              solved[i][j] = 0;
              if (i==freeRow && j==freeCol) {
                console.log('Cannot be solved!');
                return false;
              }
              vars.goingBack = true;
              a = a - 2;
            }
          }
          // otherwise, assume the value
          else {
            solved[i][j] = value;
            vars.goingBack = false;
            break;
          }
        }
      }
      // non-zero cells (immutables)
      else if (vars.goingBack) {
        // keep going back
        a = a - 2;
      }
    }
    return solved;
  }
{% endhighlight %}

#### "Smarter" Algorithm
The "smarter" algorithm uses essentially the same method as brute force, but
it first eliminates some of the solution board possibilities by checking the
adjacent row, square, and column cells for each cell.
{% highlight js %}
solveBoard: function(board) {
    vars.goingBack = false;
    var solved = util.clone(board); // start with the board hints
    var markedup = util.clone(vars.boards.empty); // empty 9x9
    var bySquares = puzzle.rowsToSquares(board);
    // check cols, rows, squares for hints
    for (var i=0;i<9;i++) {
      for (var j=0;j<9;j++) {
        var avail = [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9]; // total numbers available - we'll decrease this by checking rows, cols, boxes
        for (var k=0;k<9;k++) {
          var rnum = board[i][k];
          var cnum = board[k][j];
          var sqnum = Math.floor(i/3) * 3+Math.floor(j/3);
          var cellnum = bySquares[sqnum][k];
          if (rnum && avail.indexOf(rnum) >= 0) {
            avail.splice(avail.indexOf(rnum),1); // cell cannot have same value as another on the same row
          }
          if (cnum && avail.indexOf(cnum) >= 0) {
            avail.splice(avail.indexOf(cnum),1); // cell cannot have same value as another on the same column
          }
          if (cellnum && avail.indexOf(cellnum) >= 0) {
            avail.splice(avail.indexOf(cellnum),1); // cell cannot have same value as another on the same row
          }
        }
        markedup[i][j] = avail; // populate
      }
    }
    // now we have the values each cell cannot be, so we start our algorithm
    var freeRow; var freeCol;
    // get first mutable cell
    for (var a=0;a<9;a++) {
      for (var b=0;b<9;b++) {
        if (!solved[a][b]) {
          freeRow = a; freeCol = b; a = 9; b = 9;
        }
      }
    }
    // start search algorithm
    for (var a=0;a<81;a++) {
      var i = Math.floor(a/9);
      var j = a % 9;
      // all cells we need to change (ones that have 0s)
      if (!board[i][j]) {
        var sqnum = Math.floor(i/3)*3+Math.floor(j/3);
        var cell = 3*(i%3)+(j%3);
        var value = markedup[i][j][0]; // initial value tried for each cell
        var index = 0;
        // if backtracking
        if (vars.goingBack) {
          index = markedup[i][j].indexOf(solved[i][j]); // current index in markup
          // if this is the last value available, keep going back
          if (index + 1 == markedup[i][j].length) {
            // check if this is the first cell in sudoku board
            if (i==freeRow && j==freeCol) {
              console.log('Cannot be solved!');
              return false;
            }
            else { // set cell to 0 and keep going back
              solved[i][j] = 0;
              a = a - 2;
            }
          }
          else { // otherwise start from next value in available
            index++;
            value = markedup[i][j][index];
            vars.goingBack = false;
          }
        }
        // try all values available in markup
        while (index < markedup[i][j].length) {
          // if not valid, increment index and value
          if (!puzzle.checkValid(value,solved,i,j,sqnum,cell)) {
            index++;
            value = markedup[i][j][index];
            if (index >= markedup[i][j].length) { // if no more values, go back!
              if (i==freeRow && j==freeCol) {
                console.log('Cannot be solved!');
                return false;
              }
              solved[i][j] = 0;
              vars.goingBack = true;
              a = a - 2;
            }
          }
          // otherwise, assume the value
          else {
            solved[i][j] = value;
            vars.goingBack = false;
            break;
          }
        }
      }
      // non-zero cells (immutables)
      else if (vars.goingBack) {// keep going back
        a = a - 2;
      }
    }
    return solved;
  }
{% endhighlight %}

### Checking Validity
Remember that `checkValid(num,solBoard,row,col,sq,cell)` function we called in both
solving functions? It plays a vital role by checking whether the current configuration
is a valid board.
{% highlight js %}
checkValid: function(num,solBoard,row,col,sq,cell) {
    // num = number to check; solBoard = partially filled solution board; row = row of cell to check; col = column of cell to check (zero-indexed)
    var asSquares = puzzle.rowsToSquares(solBoard);
    for (var i=0;i<9;i++) {
      if (num == solBoard[row][i] && i!== col) {
        return false;
      }
      if (num == solBoard[i][col] && i!== row) {
        return false;
      }
      if (num == asSquares[sq][i] && i!== cell) {
        return false;
      }
    }
    return true;
  }
{% endhighlight %}

### Adding Keyboard Functions
I also added useful keyboard functionality, like being able to enter a value by
pressing a number on your keyboard instead of from the bar of numbers below the board
and using the up/down/left/right arrow keys to navigate the board.

## What I Learned
This took a **LONG** time. Like, it took a few **weeks** to get it right and fully complete.
One mistake I made which derailed me for a while was assuming that initiating a
variable and setting it equal to an existing array created a new array. Actually,
all that does is create a *reference* to the original array. I had to write a
function `clone()` that returns a copy of a given array.

<p data-height="750" data-theme-id="0" data-slug-hash="bqybpv" data-default-tab="result" data-user="acrenwelge" data-embed-version="2" data-pen-title="Dynamic Sudoku" class="codepen">
  See the Pen [Dynamic Sudoku](https://codepen.io/acrenwelge/pen/bqybpv/) by Andrew ([@acrenwelge](https://codepen.io/acrenwelge)) on [CodePen](https://codepen.io).
</p>
