---
layout: post
title:  "Personal Update - Joining Revature"
date:   2018-09-15 08:00:00 -0600
categories: Personal
tags: Full-stack
---
Wow, it's been over a year since my last blog update - in that time so many things have
happened. Last fall I interviewed for and got accepted into a coding bootcamp with Revature - a
tech industry talent recruitment and development company that trains college graduates on in-demand technologies
and places them with their clients.

My "batch" started last December in Reston, Virginia, where my wife and I relocated
temporarily - or so we thought. In the ensuing 10 weeks of training, I expanded my
skills to include Java, SQL, Angular, DevOps, RESTful web services, and a plethora
of testing technologies. Now, I can finally call myself a full-stack developer,
with experience developing multi-tiered applications both individually and in an Agile team environment.

During training, I grew conceptually and practically, learning both theory (why use
this technology? what are the benefits?) and practice (lots and lots of coding projects).
In fact, I excelled enough to be recognized as the MVP (most valuable programmer) along
with one other person in my batch. And, I was interviewed and hired for an internal position
at Revature! Instead of relocating (again), my wife and I could settle down for a while.

I've been at Revature now since March of this year, working as a Quality Analyst.
My job has allowed me to learn even more about technology and continually broaden my
horizons. For example, recently I even taught a Business Systems Analyst batch for a week
and a half on Unix/shell scripting, Microsoft Office, and SQL. I work with an awesome
team of people who are passionate about technology and making a positive impact -
both personally and professionally - on the people who come through our program. I
could not be happier with the changes in my life - both personally and professionally -
the past year. I can't wait to see what the next year will be like.
